Retrieval-Augmented Generation: Theory and Engineering Foundations 

1. Introduction 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation, commonly abbreviated as RAG, is an architecture that 
combines information retrieval with language generation. The central idea is simple: instead of 
requiring a language model to answer every question using only information stored in its 
parameters, the system retrieves relevant information from an external knowledge source and 
supplies that information to the model as context. 

A conventional language model receives a prompt and generates a response based primarily on 
patterns learned during training. The model does not automatically have access to a company's 
latest documentation, a private collection of research papers, an internal database, or 
documents uploaded by a user. Fine-tuning can change model behavior and can sometimes 
introduce domain-specific knowledge, but it is generally not the most practical mechanism for 
continuously updating factual information. 

RAG addresses this problem by separating knowledge storage from language generation. The 
external knowledge base contains the information that the system is expected to retrieve. The 
language model is responsible for interpreting the user's question, reasoning over the retrieved 
evidence, and producing a natural-language response. 

A basic RAG system can therefore be represented as a pipeline: 

User Query → Retrieval → Context Construction → Language Model → Answer 

The retrieval stage searches a collection of documents or document chunks. The context 
construction stage selects and organizes the retrieved material. The language model then 
receives the original question together with the retrieved context. 

This architecture provides several advantages. Knowledge can be updated without retraining the 
language model. Retrieved passages can be shown to users as citations. Private organizational 
information can remain outside the model's training process. Retrieval can also restrict the 
information available to the generation model to a particular collection. 

However, RAG does not automatically eliminate hallucinations. A language model can still 
generate unsupported statements even when retrieval is present. Retrieval itself can fail by 
returning irrelevant documents, incomplete information, or information that is technically 
related but insufficient to answer the question. Consequently, production RAG systems need to 
treat ingestion, chunking, indexing, retrieval, reranking, context construction, generation, and 
evaluation as separate engineering problems. 

The simplest RAG architecture is often called naive RAG. Naive RAG typically loads documents, 
splits them into fixed-size chunks, embeds those chunks, stores them in a vector database, 
retrieves the nearest chunks for a query, and inserts those chunks into a prompt. Although 
simple, this architecture provides an important baseline. More advanced RAG systems should 
be understood as improvements to specific weaknesses in this baseline rather than as 
completely unrelated architectures. 

 
2. Why RAG Is Needed 



Large language models are trained on enormous datasets, but their internal parameters are not 
equivalent to a traditional database. A model does not perform an exact database lookup 
whenever it produces an answer. Instead, it generates text based on statistical patterns 
encoded during training. 

This creates several practical problems. 

The first problem is knowledge freshness. A model may not know about documents created 
after its training data was collected. Even when a model has been trained on information about 
a particular topic, that information may have changed. 

The second problem is private information. Organizations often need systems that can answer 
questions about internal documents, customer records, technical manuals, policies, or 
proprietary research. Such information may not be present in the model's training data. 

The third problem is traceability. A model can provide a plausible answer without explaining 
which source supports that answer. RAG can associate generated answers with retrieved 
passages and therefore make source attribution easier. 

The fourth problem is domain specificity. A general-purpose model may know a broad amount 
of information but may not know the terminology, procedures, or internal conventions of a 
specialized organization. 

RAG provides a mechanism for connecting a general-purpose language model to a changing 
external knowledge source. 

For example, consider an organization with thousands of internal documents. A user asks: 

"What is the process for requesting production database access?" 

Instead of expecting the language model to know the organization's internal policy, the RAG 
system searches the organization's documentation. It might retrieve an access policy, an 
approval procedure, and an internal security guide. Those documents become evidence for the 
generation model. 

The model can then answer using the retrieved information. 

The important distinction is that the model is not necessarily learning the information 
permanently. It is being given relevant information at inference time. 

 
3. The Basic RAG Pipeline 

A typical RAG system contains two major pipelines: an offline ingestion pipeline and an online 
query pipeline. 

The ingestion pipeline prepares knowledge for retrieval. 

Documents → Loading → Parsing → Chunking → Embedding → Indexing 

The query pipeline retrieves knowledge when the user asks a question. 

Query → Query Processing → Retrieval → Reranking → Context Construction → Generation 



Separating these pipelines is important because ingestion usually happens less frequently than 
querying. 

A document may be uploaded once and then queried thousands of times. It would be inefficient 
to parse and embed the document every time a user asks a question. Instead, the system 
preprocesses the document and stores its searchable representation. 

During ingestion, a loader reads a document from a source such as a filesystem, object storage 
system, web page, database, or API. The loader produces a normalized document 
representation. 

The document is then divided into chunks. Chunking determines the units that will later be 
retrieved. 

Each chunk is converted into an embedding vector. The vector captures semantic properties of 
the chunk according to the embedding model. 

The vectors are stored in an index, often together with the original text and metadata. 

When a user submits a query, the query is embedded using the same embedding model or a 
compatible query encoder. The retrieval system compares the query representation with stored 
chunk representations. 

The highest-scoring candidates are selected. 

The candidates may then be reranked by a more expensive relevance model. 

Finally, the selected context is inserted into a prompt and passed to a language model. 

 
4. Documents and Document Loaders 

Before chunking can occur, the system must convert different sources into a consistent internal 
representation. 

A document loader is responsible for reading an input source and producing a normalized 
document object. 

A loader might read: 

• TXT files  

• Markdown files  

• PDFs  

• HTML pages  

• Word documents  

• CSV files  

• JSON documents  

• database records  

• web pages  



• cloud storage objects  

Different formats have different structures. A plain text file may simply contain a sequence of 
characters. A PDF may contain pages, tables, figures, equations, and multiple columns. 
Markdown contains explicit headings and formatting. CSV contains rows and columns. 

A good ingestion architecture hides these format-specific details behind a common interface. 

For example, a normalized document might contain: 

document ID 
document name 
source path 
MIME type 
pages or blocks 
document metadata 

Each page can contain: 

page number 
text 
page metadata 

This representation allows downstream components to operate on documents without knowing 
exactly how they were loaded. 

The distinction between loading and chunking is important. A loader should primarily answer 
the question: 

"How do I extract the document into a normalized representation?" 

A chunker should answer: 

"How should this representation be divided into retrievable units?" 

Mixing these responsibilities makes the system difficult to extend. 

 
5. Chunking 

Chunking is the process of dividing a document into smaller pieces. 

Chunking is one of the most important components of a RAG pipeline because retrieval 
normally operates on chunks rather than entire documents. 

Suppose a document contains 100 pages. If the entire document is embedded as one vector, a 
query about one small paragraph has to match against a representation containing many 
unrelated concepts. 

Instead, the document can be divided into smaller units. 

For example: 

Document → Chunk 1, Chunk 2, Chunk 3, ..., Chunk N 

Each chunk receives its own embedding. 



The choice of chunk boundaries affects retrieval quality. 

If chunks are too large, they contain too many concepts. The resulting embedding may be less 
specific and the retrieved context may contain unnecessary information. 

If chunks are too small, important context can be lost. A definition might be separated from its 
explanation. A table might be separated from its caption. A theorem might be separated from its 
proof. 

Therefore chunking involves a tradeoff between contextual completeness and retrieval 
precision. 

There is no universally optimal chunk size. 

The correct strategy depends on the document type, question distribution, embedding model, 
retrieval system, and generation model. 

 
6. Fixed-Size Chunking 

Fixed-size chunking is the simplest chunking strategy. 

A document is divided according to a predefined number of characters or tokens. 

Suppose: 

chunk size = 1000 characters 
overlap = 200 characters 

The first chunk contains characters 0 through 999. 

The next chunk begins at character 800. 

The third begins at character 1600. 

The overlap is intended to preserve information around chunk boundaries. 

The advantage of fixed-size chunking is simplicity. The behavior is deterministic and easy to 
understand. It requires no understanding of document structure. 

It also provides an excellent baseline for experiments. 

However, fixed-size chunking has an important weakness: it does not understand semantics. 

Consider the sentence: 

"Retrieval quality depends heavily on the quality of the embedding model because..." 

If the chunk ends immediately after "because", the next chunk may contain the rest of the 
explanation. The two chunks individually become less meaningful. 

Fixed-size chunking may also split: 

• paragraphs  

• sentences  

• headings  



• code blocks  

• tables  

• equations  

• lists  

This does not make fixed-size chunking useless. Instead, it establishes a baseline against which 
more sophisticated approaches can be evaluated. 

 
7. Chunk Overlap 

Chunk overlap is commonly used with fixed-size chunking. 

Suppose the chunk size is 1000 characters and the overlap is 200 characters. 

Chunk one covers: 

0–1000 

Chunk two covers: 

800–1800 

Chunk three covers: 

1600–2600 

The 200-character overlap ensures that information near the boundary appears in both chunks. 

Overlap can improve retrieval because a query matching information at a boundary has a 
greater chance of retrieving a chunk containing sufficient context. 

However, overlap introduces costs. 

More overlap means more chunks. 

More chunks mean more embeddings. 

More embeddings mean greater storage and indexing cost. 

Overlap can also cause retrieval redundancy. Multiple highly similar chunks may appear among 
the top results. 

The optimal overlap therefore depends on the application. 

A common mistake is assuming that larger overlap always produces better retrieval. It does not. 
Excessive overlap can increase cost without improving answer quality. 

 
8. Recursive Chunking 

Recursive chunking attempts to preserve natural boundaries. 

Instead of blindly cutting at a character count, a recursive splitter can attempt to divide text 
using a hierarchy of separators. 



For example: 

1. paragraphs  

2. lines  

3. sentences  

4. words  

5. characters  

The splitter first tries to create chunks using large semantic boundaries. If a resulting piece is 
still too large, it recursively splits it using smaller boundaries. 

This produces chunks that are approximately the target size while preserving more natural 
structure. 

Recursive chunking is often a strong default for ordinary prose. 

However, it still does not necessarily understand the deeper semantic structure of a document. 
A Markdown heading might be treated as just another line unless the splitter is specifically 
configured to recognize headings. 

 
9. Structure-Aware Chunking 

Structure-aware chunking uses information about the document's organization. 

For Markdown, the structure may be: 

Retrieval 

Dense Retrieval 

Embeddings 

Vector Search 

A structure-aware chunker can preserve this hierarchy. 

A chunk containing information about embeddings can have metadata such as: 

document = rag.md 
heading = Retrieval 
subheading = Dense Retrieval 
subsection = Embeddings 

This metadata can be used during retrieval and citation. 

Structure-aware chunking is particularly useful for documents where headings convey 
meaning. 

Consider two chunks: 

"Performance improved by 12 percent." 

and: 



"Performance improved by 12 percent." 

Without context, the statement is ambiguous. 

But if metadata says: 

section = Experiments 
subsection = Retrieval Recall 

the meaning becomes clearer. 

This demonstrates why metadata is not merely bookkeeping. Metadata can become part of the 
retrieval architecture. 

 
10. Semantic Chunking 

Semantic chunking attempts to identify boundaries based on meaning rather than purely 
structural markers or character counts. 

One approach is to split a document into sentences and calculate embeddings for neighboring 
sentences. If the semantic similarity between adjacent groups changes significantly, the system 
may consider that location a potential chunk boundary. 

For example, a document might begin by discussing embedding models and then transition to 
vector database indexing. 

A semantic chunker could detect that the topic has changed and create a new chunk. 

The benefit is that chunks can better correspond to coherent topics. 

The disadvantage is increased computational cost and complexity. Semantic chunking may 
require multiple embedding operations during ingestion. 

It also introduces additional hyperparameters, such as similarity thresholds and minimum or 
maximum chunk sizes. 

Semantic chunking should therefore be evaluated rather than assumed to be superior. 

 
11. Chunk Metadata 

A chunk should not contain only text. 

A production RAG system should preserve metadata describing the chunk's origin. 

A generic chunk might contain: 

id 
document_id 
text 
metadata 

Metadata might contain: 



document name 
source path 
MIME type 
chunk index 
total chunks 
page number 
section 
subsection 
start position 
end position 
chunking strategy 

For example: 

{ 
"document_name": "rag.pdf", 
"source_path": "papers/rag.pdf", 
"mime_type": "application/pdf", 
"chunk_index": 17, 
"total_chunks": 80, 
"page_start": 5, 
"page_end": 6, 
"chunking_strategy": "structure_aware" 
} 

Metadata enables several capabilities. 

First, it supports citations. 

Second, it allows filtering. 

Third, it helps debugging. 

Fourth, it enables evaluation. 

Fifth, it enables advanced retrieval strategies. 

A generic chunk interface should remain stable while metadata can vary by document type. 

 
12. Research Paper Chunking 

Research papers are particularly challenging for RAG. 

A research paper may contain: 

title 
abstract 
introduction 
related work 
methodology 
experiments 
results 



discussion 
conclusion 
references 

Within these sections there may be: 

subsections 
paragraphs 
tables 
figures 
equations 
captions 
footnotes 
citations 

A naive fixed-size splitter can destroy these relationships. 

For example, a table might be split across chunks. 

A figure caption might become separated from the figure. 

An equation might be separated from the paragraph explaining it. 

A better research-paper representation is hierarchical. 

Paper 
→ Section 
→ Subsection 
→ Paragraph 
→ Chunk 

Tables and figures can be represented as special blocks. 

This hierarchy allows the retrieval system to operate at different levels. 

 
13. Multigranularity Retrieval 

Multigranularity is particularly interesting for research papers. 

Instead of creating only one type of chunk, the system can preserve multiple granularities. 

For example: 

Document level 
Section level 
Subsection level 
Paragraph level 
Leaf chunk level 

Small chunks are useful for precise retrieval. 

Large chunks are useful for context. 

This creates a useful separation: 



Retrieval granularity ≠ Generation granularity 

Suppose a user asks: 

"What optimizer did the authors use?" 

A small paragraph might contain exactly the answer. 

The retriever can find that paragraph. 

But if the question is: 

"Explain the methodology used by the authors." 

a single paragraph may be insufficient. 

The system can retrieve a small child chunk and then expand it to its parent subsection. 

This is commonly described as parent-child retrieval or contextual expansion. 

 
14. Parent-Child Retrieval 

Parent-child retrieval creates relationships between chunks. 

For example: 

Parent: 

Section 3 — Methodology 

Children: 

Chunk 31 
Chunk 32 
Chunk 33 
Chunk 34 

The children are embedded individually. 

The retriever searches the children. 

If Chunk 32 is retrieved, the system can optionally retrieve its parent section and use that larger 
context during generation. 

This combines the retrieval precision of small chunks with the contextual completeness of 
larger sections. 

The approach also makes metadata important. 

A chunk might contain: 

parent_id = section_3 

When the retriever returns the chunk, the context construction stage can look up the parent. 

This architecture is one of the natural extensions of basic chunking. 

 



15. Tables in RAG 

Tables present a special challenge. 

Consider: 

Model | Accuracy | F1 
A | 91.2 | 89.7 
B | 93.4 | 91.1 

If a PDF extraction process produces a poorly ordered text stream, the table structure may be 
lost. 

A query such as: 

"Which model achieved the highest F1 score?" 

requires understanding the relationship between row labels, columns, and values. 

A table-aware ingestion system can convert the table into structured text. 

For example: 

Table: Model Performance 

Model A: 
Accuracy = 91.2 
F1 = 89.7 

Model B: 
Accuracy = 93.4 
F1 = 91.1 

The table can then be embedded as a coherent unit. 

Metadata should identify the table and its source location. 

 
16. Figures and Images 

Figures can also contain important information. 

A research paper might contain an architecture diagram that explains how a model works. 

Traditional text-only RAG cannot directly understand the visual content unless the image has 
been converted into useful text. 

A basic system can preserve: 

figure number 
caption 
page number 
surrounding text 

An advanced multimodal system can use a vision-language model to generate a description of 
the figure. 



The description can then be embedded. 

The image itself can also potentially be stored and retrieved. 

This produces multimodal RAG. 

However, multimodal processing introduces additional complexity and should generally be 
added after a strong text-based baseline has been established. 

 
17. Equations 

Equations can be difficult for text extraction systems. 

For example: 

Attention(Q,K,V) = softmax(QKᵀ / √dₖ)V 

The equation itself may not explain what Q, K, V, or dₖ represent. 

The surrounding text often provides the necessary meaning. 

Therefore, equations should generally remain associated with their explanatory context. 

A good representation may contain: 

section 
preceding explanation 
equation 
following explanation 

This allows retrieval to return a meaningful unit instead of an isolated mathematical expression. 

 
18. Embeddings 

Embeddings are numerical representations of text. 

An embedding model transforms a piece of text into a vector: 

text → embedding vector 

For example, a chunk might become a vector with hundreds or thousands of dimensions. 

The actual numerical values are not human interpretable individually. Their usefulness comes 
from the geometric relationships between vectors. 

Semantically similar texts should ideally produce vectors that are close according to the 
similarity metric used by the retrieval system. 

For example: 

"How does RAG retrieve documents?" 

and: 

"What mechanism is used to find relevant passages?" 



may have different words but similar semantic meaning. 

A good embedding model should represent them as related vectors. 

 
19. Cosine Similarity 

Cosine similarity is a common metric for comparing embeddings. 

Given vectors A and B: 

cosine_similarity(A,B) = (A · B) / (||A|| ||B||) 

The value measures the angle between the vectors. 

A value close to 1 indicates that the vectors point in similar directions. 

A value close to 0 indicates little directional similarity. 

The exact similarity behavior depends on the embedding model and normalization. 

Vector search systems use similarity metrics to identify candidate chunks. 

However, similarity should not be interpreted as perfect relevance. 

A chunk can be semantically similar to a query while still failing to answer it. 

For example, a query about "retrieval latency" might retrieve a document discussing "retrieval 
quality" because the concepts are related. 

This is one reason reranking can be useful. 

 
20. Vector Indexing 

If a knowledge base contains only a few hundred chunks, comparing a query embedding against 
every chunk may be acceptable. 

But suppose the system contains ten million chunks. 

A brute-force search would require comparing the query against millions of vectors. 

Approximate nearest neighbor algorithms make this problem more manageable. 

One popular approach is HNSW, or Hierarchical Navigable Small World graphs. 

HNSW creates a graph structure that allows approximate nearest neighbor search. 

The algorithm trades some exactness for significantly faster retrieval. 

Important parameters influence the tradeoff between recall, memory, indexing speed, and 
query latency. 

The appropriate configuration depends on the application's scale and performance 
requirements. 

 



21. Vector Databases 

A vector database manages vector storage, indexing, metadata, and retrieval. 

A typical record might contain: 

id 
embedding 
text 
metadata 

The metadata may include: 

document_id 
tenant_id 
source 
page 
section 
timestamp 
permissions 

A query can request the nearest vectors and optionally apply metadata filters. 

For example: 

retrieve the top 10 chunks 
where document_id = "paper_123" 

or: 

retrieve chunks where tenant_id = "company_A" 

Metadata filtering becomes especially important in multi-tenant systems. 

 
22. Hybrid Retrieval 

Vector search is not always enough. 

Some queries depend heavily on exact terminology. 

For example: 

"What is error code E-1047?" 

Semantic retrieval may understand the general meaning but fail to prioritize the exact error 
code. 

Keyword retrieval such as BM25 can be much better for exact terms. 

Hybrid retrieval combines lexical and semantic methods. 

The system may retrieve candidates from: 

vector search 
keyword search 



and then combine or rerank the results. 

This can provide stronger retrieval across different query types. 

Semantic search is generally good at conceptual similarity. 

Keyword search is generally good at exact matching. 

Hybrid retrieval attempts to exploit both. 

 
23. Query Rewriting 

Users do not always ask questions in retrieval-friendly language. 

A query might be: 

"what about that database thing from earlier?" 

A query rewriting model can transform it into a more explicit search query based on 
conversation context. 

Another example: 

Original: 

"How does it deal with bad retrieval?" 

Rewritten: 

"How does the RAG system handle irrelevant or low-quality retrieved documents?" 

Query rewriting can improve retrieval because the rewritten query contains clearer terminology. 

However, query rewriting can also introduce errors. 

If the rewriting model misunderstands the user's intent, the retrieval query may move away from 
the actual question. 

Therefore query rewriting should be evaluated as an independent component. 

 
24. Multi-Query Retrieval 

A single query may express a concept in only one way. 

Multi-query retrieval generates multiple related search queries. 

For example: 

Original: 

"How can RAG reduce hallucinations?" 

Generated queries: 

"How does retrieval grounding reduce hallucinations?" 

"What role does retrieved context play in factual accuracy?" 



"How does evidence-based generation improve reliability?" 

Each query is sent to the retrieval system. 

The candidate sets are then combined. 

This can improve recall because different query formulations may retrieve different relevant 
documents. 

The cost is additional model calls and retrieval operations. 

 
25. HyDE 

HyDE stands for Hypothetical Document Embeddings. 

The basic idea is to generate a hypothetical answer or document that might answer the query, 
then embed that generated text and use the resulting vector for retrieval. 

For example: 

User query: 

"How does parent-child retrieval work?" 

Instead of directly embedding the question, a language model generates a hypothetical 
explanation. 

That hypothetical explanation is embedded. 

The retrieval system searches for documents similar to the hypothetical explanation. 

The technique can sometimes improve retrieval because documents and generated 
hypothetical answers may have more similar linguistic structure than a short question and a 
technical document. 

However, the hypothetical text is not treated as factual evidence. It is only a retrieval 
mechanism. 

 
26. Reranking 

Initial retrieval usually prioritizes speed. 

A vector database can quickly return the top 20 or 50 candidates. 

A reranker can then examine those candidates more carefully. 

A common architecture is: 

Query 
↓ 
Vector search 
↓ 
Top 50 candidates 
↓ 



Reranker 
↓ 
Top 5 candidates 

A cross-encoder reranker jointly processes the query and candidate text. 

This allows it to model detailed interactions between them. 

Reranking is often useful when the initial retriever has high recall but mediocre precision. 

The tradeoff is latency and computation. 

A production system should therefore use reranking selectively. 

 
27. Context Compression 

Retrieved chunks can contain irrelevant information. 

Context compression attempts to remove unnecessary material before sending it to the 
language model. 

Suppose a chunk contains 800 tokens but only 150 tokens directly answer the question. 

A compression system might extract the relevant portion. 

This reduces prompt size. 

Smaller contexts can reduce latency and model cost. 

However, aggressive compression can accidentally remove important supporting information. 

Compression should therefore be evaluated for both relevance and information preservation. 

 
28. Context Window 

Language models have finite context windows. 

Even if a model supports a very large context, providing thousands of irrelevant chunks can 
degrade performance. 

This creates a fundamental RAG design problem: 

How much retrieved context should be given to the model? 

Too little context can cause missing information. 

Too much context can cause noise, cost, and attention dilution. 

A good system therefore tries to retrieve a small amount of high-quality context. 

This is why retrieval precision matters. 

The goal is not to retrieve as much information as possible. 

The goal is to retrieve the information necessary to answer the question. 



 
29. Generation 

After retrieval and context construction, the language model receives a prompt containing: 

system instructions 
retrieved context 
user question 

A simple prompt might say: 

"Answer the question using only the provided context. If the context does not contain enough 
information, say that the information is unavailable." 

Then the model receives retrieved chunks. 

The generation model is responsible for synthesizing the evidence into a coherent answer. 

Importantly, the generation model should not be expected to compensate for poor retrieval. 

If the relevant document is never retrieved, the model cannot reliably use it. 

This leads to an important debugging principle: 

When a RAG answer is wrong, first determine whether the correct evidence was retrieved. 

If it was not retrieved, the problem is primarily retrieval. 

If the correct evidence was retrieved but the answer is still wrong, the problem may lie in 
context construction or generation. 

 
30. Hallucinations in RAG 

RAG can reduce hallucinations but does not eliminate them. 

A language model can still generate information that is unsupported by the retrieved context. 

Hallucination can occur because: 

the retriever returned irrelevant information 
the correct information was missing 
the context was ambiguous 
the model misunderstood the evidence 
the model relied on prior knowledge 
the prompt allowed unsupported generation 

One useful design principle is grounded generation. 

The model should be instructed to base factual claims on retrieved evidence. 

The system can also require citations. 

For example: 

"According to the retrieved documentation, the system uses HNSW indexing." 



The application can associate that statement with a source chunk. 

Citation requirements can improve traceability, although they do not guarantee factual 
correctness. 

 
31. Citation Systems 

A production RAG system should preserve source identity throughout the pipeline. 

Suppose a retrieved chunk has: 

document_id = paper_123 
page_start = 5 
page_end = 6 

The generation layer can use this information to produce a citation. 

The user might see: 

"The authors use a hierarchical retrieval architecture. [Paper, pages 5–6]" 

The citation system requires the ingestion pipeline to preserve metadata. 

This is why chunk metadata should be designed early rather than added as an afterthought. 

A stable chunk ID also makes it possible to trace a generated answer back to the exact retrieval 
result. 

 
32. Evaluation 

Evaluation is essential for production RAG. 

A system can produce fluent answers while performing poorly on retrieval. 

Evaluation should therefore be performed at multiple levels. 

Ingestion evaluation checks whether documents are correctly loaded and parsed. 

Chunking evaluation checks whether important information is preserved in useful units. 

Retrieval evaluation checks whether relevant chunks are returned. 

Generation evaluation checks whether the final answer is correct and grounded. 

Latency and cost evaluation checks whether the architecture is practical. 

A good evaluation dataset contains representative user questions. 

For each question, the dataset may include: 

question 
expected answer 
relevant document 
relevant chunk 
expected citations 



This enables systematic comparison between strategies. 

 
33. Retrieval Metrics 

Recall@K measures whether relevant information appears within the top K retrieved results. 

For example, if the correct chunk is among the top five results, Recall@5 considers that query 
successfully retrieved relevant information. 

Precision@K measures how many of the top K results are relevant. 

Mean Reciprocal Rank considers the position of the first relevant result. 

If the correct result appears first, the reciprocal rank is 1. 

If it appears second, the reciprocal rank is 1/2. 

If it appears fifth, the reciprocal rank is 1/5. 

NDCG, or Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain, evaluates ranking quality while giving 
greater importance to highly ranked relevant results. 

Different metrics answer different questions. 

Recall is important when missing evidence is dangerous. 

Precision is important when context capacity is limited. 

Ranking metrics are important when only the top few results will be passed to the model. 

 
34. Generation Evaluation 

Generation evaluation can consider several dimensions. 

Correctness asks whether the answer is factually accurate. 

Relevance asks whether it answers the user's actual question. 

Completeness asks whether important information was omitted. 

Groundedness asks whether the answer is supported by retrieved evidence. 

Citation correctness asks whether citations actually support the claims they are attached to. 

A system can score well on one dimension and poorly on another. 

For example, an answer may be factually correct but unsupported by the retrieved context. 

Alternatively, an answer may cite relevant documents but misunderstand their content. 

This is why end-to-end evaluation alone is insufficient. 

 
35. RAG Failure Modes 

RAG systems have several common failure modes. 



The first is retrieval failure. 

The correct information exists in the knowledge base but is not retrieved. 

The second is chunking failure. 

The correct information exists, but it is split into chunks that are difficult to retrieve or interpret. 

The third is ranking failure. 

The correct chunk is retrieved but ranked below irrelevant candidates. 

The fourth is context failure. 

The correct evidence is retrieved but omitted from the final prompt. 

The fifth is generation failure. 

The correct evidence is provided to the model but the model generates an incorrect answer. 

The sixth is ingestion failure. 

The document was parsed incorrectly or never entered the knowledge base. 

Understanding these categories is important because each requires a different solution. 

Increasing the model size will not fix a document ingestion bug. 

Adding more retrieval candidates will not necessarily fix a broken PDF parser. 

Changing the prompt will not solve a retrieval system that never finds the relevant document.